Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson. Thank you, everybody, for listening as always. Of course, I'm going to ask you to subscribe to the podcast, but you all know that. So a five-star rating wherever you listen to your podcasts would be great. And of course, especially sharing the podcast on a forum or with a friend. Word of mouth always helps us out a lot and the most. So if you'd also like to donate to the show, because of course we are ad-free, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. We are going to have...
we have some show notes up on the website if in fact we have show notes today but it's 10 minute tips so we've got 10 minutes of prep so we'll see if we mention anything and we'll mention that we'll put it up on the website if you have any coaching or consultation inquiries of course send those to empiricalcycling at gmail.com because of course we are a coaching company first and foremost
And if you have any questions or comments, let me know. You can also slide into the DMs on Instagram at Empirical Cycling. We do have some weekend AMAs up in the stories. And of course, we are going to be answering some listener questions on today's training myths, which I put up in the stories, of course, and then weekend AMAs as well. And of course, people have been liking lately. I got my hands on some World Tour files.
I've been doing little brief bits of analysis within the Instagram character limit, which is actually very difficult. So go check those out at Empirical Cycling. Thanks for everybody for checking all the stuff already. And so also we have one more announcement, which is that Kyle's voice is a little raspy because he sniffed hot last week. And are you still sniffing hot or are you testing negative?
I haven't tested today. I tested positive yesterday. The line was very dark. No mistaking that one. I'll probably take another one tomorrow just to conserve the rapid tests. But, you know, we'll see. Well, so I'm sorry you're missing track, Nats, but that means that we get to hang out for a podcast. And so today for Funzy's podcast, because Kyle is now feeling good enough to podcast, we are doing some fitness myths.
So, Kyle, our first myth, I think this is a big one that I get a lot in the Instagram AMAs, of course, is that sprinters and non-sprinters need to train differently, specifically speaking of their aerobic training, like FTP, sweet spot, endurance riding, all that kind of stuff. So where are you at with all this kind of stuff right now?
So, one question, I assume you mean like road sprinters, not like track sprinters Not track sprinters Road sprinters, but also Yeah, this would also go for like Criterium Racers, you know, designated sprinters But also, you know, track enduro kind of stuff, cyclocross, mountain biking, yeah I would say that's a myth, but there's like, kind of like with some of these myths, there's like maybe a
maybe a nugget of truth in there if you think that like actually if this person is very sprintery then they probably like when you're training too hard for criteriums episodes they probably need to do more aerobic training and less fewer like big anaerobic workouts but to say differently in the sense that like oh are they gonna do different intervals or like you know I don't know instead of doing
20 minute sweet spot. Are you going to do, you know, 21 minute sweet spots with 10, you know, with 10 seconds resting or something like ridiculous like that? Like, no. Yeah. Well, I think I think kind of where this myth started was, you know, thinking about first, I think.
A lot of people are under the impression that there's trade-offs between being able to sprint and having big aerobic engines. And looking at data from Matthew Vanderpoel shows that that's really not the case, that you can have both, and that if you have both, you're extremely lucky to have both. But that developing one does not preclude the development of the other, and it doesn't really mean that you're going to impact it. It's like lifting weights in and of itself does not necessarily make your heart smaller.
You know what I mean? It's not like your heart can't transport the oxygen. Like you can add some weights a little bit and you can increase your neural drive. You can increase your muscle stiffness. You can change your penation angle. You can change all sorts of things without really changing anything else. And so I think that's probably part of where it seems to come from. Yeah. And I would also assume that it comes from the fact that if you are training, you probably...
only have a finite amount of training that you can realistically survive. So people think like, oh, if I'm doing all this aerobic work.
And then I just add in weights and sprinting on top of it like, oh, my aerobic workouts go worse. And you're like, well, yeah, you're just tired. Of course, if you just add 30% more volume of any kind, be it anything but walking and eating donuts, it's going to be harder and you're going to do worse at something. Something has to give eventually. And so maybe that is also one reason why. Or perhaps that people...
maybe aren't periodizing super well. And so maybe they're feeling like they're, oh, I've spent a lot of time doing all these sprint workouts, maybe too much time. And then their aerobic fitness decreased a little bit because they spent too much time just doing like 30-30s or something. I don't know. Yeah. Well, here's the other thing is how are you testing your aerobic fitness? And a lot of people are thinking about FTP tests. And of course, that means
20-minute tests, ramp tests, 2x8 minutes, take your pick. And of course, it adds fatigue. And so when you go out to do these tests, even if you do one of my longer tests, if you go out tired, the result is going to be very different. In consulting with a lot of people the last couple of years, one of the things that I see, not with everybody, but with quite a few people, is not nearly enough rest. Even if...
Otherwise, all the other training principles are there. The rest is really, really something that needs work. Like, imagine finishing VO2Max block on like a Thursday or a Friday, kind of riding easy, doing a group ride on the weekend, then the next Tuesday you test your FTP. Like, yeah.
I've seen that way more often than I thought I ever would. But that's one of the reasons that people always need a second look, need a gut check. So that's not unreasonable. I don't judge anybody for that. I'm like, this is suboptimal. Let's change it. And they're like, OK, cool. But I think also- You mean my ramp test opener of a max deadlift is less than optimal? Do you want big numbers or not?
I also think that part of this comes from fiber type. So we could also frame this in the way of fiber type or people should train differently with different fiber types and depending on the
training, I don't know, system that you might look at that may or may not have a lot of marketing out there might say this needs to be done. But here's a couple things about fiber type that we may or may not have discussed previously in the podcast, but it's always worth another mention. I think fiber type, like type two, type one fibers to just break them up broadly.
The distribution that we see in people varies widely, and they can change over time, especially if you do more strength training, or if you do more endurance training, or if you're doing kind of both. These things will change the characteristics of the muscles, but there's also a lot of tables if you just Google muscle fiber type.
and just go to Google Images or even just on the regular splash page. It'll show you this fiber type can do this. This fiber type does this. This fiber type does this. And if you start to build a philosophy based on these things that we get from textbooks, but science in the last three to five years has really shown is quite a bit more nuanced. Actually, a lot more than that in terms of years.
If you start to build a philosophy on that, then you get to some things that in practice we see are wrong. And once we understand how the characteristics of the fibers are determined, like we did a Wonstock episode a couple months ago about how type 2 fibers in cross-country skiers were almost as good fat burners as type 1 fibers. They could just make more force.
And that's another thing that also comes up is when you think about your sprint, oh, I've got a good sprint, I must have a lot of fast twitch fibers. That may be true. It may not be true. Because we are also forgetting about rate of force development and the fact that we can pick our own gears in cycling. And so if somebody needs to sprint at 90 RPM to make the max power, they can do that. As opposed to somebody with a lot of fast twitch fibers and really good rate of force development that would maybe sprint at, you know, 100.
40 RPM is peak power. Right, right, right. And I think you can even see that if you watch the end of like not like even pan flat stages or slightly uphill sprint finish stages where you see like some people will be on a huge gear sprinting at like 95 RPM.
Or some people, yeah, will be like out of the saddle, like spinning 125 RPM, 130 or whatever, like, you know. Yeah, Cavendish, good one for that. Lately, of course, people watching the, God, I'm not even going to try to, the Women's Tour de France. I'm going to destroy that French if I try. Aavec Zwift. Sorry, that is such cringe marketing. But we have to say it, right? So, well, no, we don't. Never mind. I'm going to edit that out.
Oh, the magic. So when you look at them, they're spinning high cadences, and that could be fiber type, that could be rate of force development, that could be any number of things. And so we really don't know. And of course, we've talked about distribution in muscles before, but what it really comes down to is, let's say you want to try to work on somebody's ability to burn fat, right?
And so if you go, let's say, if you think you go too hard, that you might recruit fast-twitch fibers. Ooh, spooky. And it's fast-twitch fibers, they rely on glycolysis. Dun, dun, dun. Sometimes. Sometimes. And so people are, of course, under the impression that whatever you burn is what you get good at burning, which is...
We'll talk about that in a wrap-up Wattstock episode on the series of metabolism. But that's really honestly not the case. And one of the things that I've noticed in training people with pro riders with an 1800-watt sprint versus pro riders with a 900-watt sprint, the difference in the aerobic training is that typically...
the sprinters actually need more aerobic training and they need it to a greater degree than a lot of less sprinty folks. Cause at the end of the day, I don't care what your sprint is. I care what kind of stuff do you respond to and how do we get you on your best legs? And are you a laid out person? You know, is this going to be a fast finish? Is this going to be an uphill finish? Like we need to know these kinds of things and then we can tailor the training, but you know,
So prescribing or changing the training based on either fiber type or sprint characteristics, I think really misses the forest for the trees here. Yeah, I agree. Like it, I think it's, it's, you're searching for this piece of insight or this like deeper connection there that like just doesn't exist or shouldn't exist if you step back and are thinking about it.
A little bit more. Yeah. Well, Kyle, why don't you – we've never done this before, but let's put you on the spot because I know you're recovering from COVID, but let's get all five of your brain cells back up and running again. Yeah. All right. So if you were going to advocate for changing your training by being a better sprinter, because you are a really good sprinter yourself, why would you think that you would want to –
change some parts of the training. Like, why would you want to think, like, don't do any, like, super long rides or maybe not do so much FTP or maybe do shorter aerobic efforts or something like that? Only thing I can really think of is that, okay, you're maybe a little heavier if you're a sprinter. So, like, you know, if you decided that you were going to do your, you know.
aerobic efforts that day climbing that may be less ideal if it forces you into a terrible cadence range where you're like, no, not really getting the right work in because you're trying to do some 20-minute climb or whatever, but it's 60 RPMs and it's terrible. So maybe being somewhat smart about that. But then also, maybe for some things, you maybe feel like you need a little bit more recovery time, but that could just be because you're not as well aerobically trained. That's where I go with that, yeah.
Yeah, like, and some of it could also just be that if you are, people like to do the things that they're good at, so say if you aren't that good at aerobic training and you are because you're a sprinter and like, I want to go fast, like, you have to find the modality that like you enjoy for aerobic training, you know, so if that's not seven hour rides with 10,000 feet of climbing, you know, every
10 miles or whatever, then yeah, like you got to figure out what actually works for you that way. Yeah. It could be, it could be mountain bike rides. You never know, but like, uh, well, you know, it's funny cause you say the recovery and I think that's, you know, again, that is a big part of this because a lot of the time, um, uh, when I, when I look at, uh, you know, training plans, uh, people put together themselves or from whatever and, and they're, they're tired on race day.
And they come to the final sprint and they look at their final sprint and they're like, uh-oh, I only did a thousand watts peak, but fresh, I can do like 1500. Where is that? I need to do more sprint training. And that's the principle behind you're training too hard for criteriums. And so they go, oh, I need to do more sprint training because it's a lot of sprints. And that's that overly specific kind of...
stuff. Yeah. Or they think I need to do a lot of sprinting when I'm tired. So they're going to go out and do like hard aerobic workouts and then try to like sprint really hard at the end. You're like, cool. You know, it's funny you say that because I think a lot of people do do that. I mean, this is just my impression. I don't have any statistics or anything like that. But if you're somebody who does that, I strongly advise you to split them up because every time, because I train people who win sprints.
They win sprints all the time. And the natural sprinters, honestly, I give them less sprint training than you would probably imagine. Like if they're like, oh, I feel like I need a little speed work. Okay, cool. What gives them feeling like they have good leg speed? It's like doing sprints, maybe. Moto pacing, yes. Doing high cadence work, maybe. You know, explosive work at the gym, maybe. So, and then we try to figure out what's the minimum dose you need.
to have your best legs in race day because, you know, I put up in my Instagram post today for the analysis of, you know, Matthew Vanderpoel is tired, big surprise. One of the things that I saw, I grabbed his Spring Classics campaign from Milan-Saint-Remo up to Paris-Roubaix, I think was the duration.
then compared that to the Giro, then compared that to the Tour and his peak 10 second power for each. And it goes down by like 150 watts for each block because what was, how did I put it? Like fatigue is the ultimate watt block. Like you're getting watt blocks by fatigue. It's really not so fun. You need a better wingman and your wingman has recovery. Yeah, that.
And that's not surprising though, right? Like there aren't, like the pro racing season like that is really long and all these races are really hard. Like there are no, you know, easy days or like, you know, oh, like days where you can just be like, ah, we're phoning it in. This kind of, the second myth I have up here kind of folds into this because I tried to group a couple together.
all at the same time that are in the same vein. So this one is that crit racers mostly need to focus on anaerobic efforts. And I think this could certainly be a thing for sure if it's a weakness, right? Like if I were going to train for criteriums, I spent the last couple of months off.
moving and busy and all that kind of stuff. I'm training again, right? My peak power right now is, you know, the meager 1950 watts. So when I need to get an if or if I were going to get in shape for Criterium, would I need to do a whole bunch of sprints?
No! I would need to get my FTP up from my massive 200, read it and weep, fellas, to be able to hang on for the race. And by the end of the race, if I got 10 seconds of coasting or easy pedaling before the sprint, I could probably bust out 1,400. But it's not going to be a good 1,400. I bet I'm not going to be able to stand up.
It's got to be, if I'm seeing it, maybe 12. I don't know. It's not going to be good. So if you have a weakness with this kind of stuff, the real question is, how do you build it year round? And of course, you need to start with what is the limiter of my sprint? And so if you're somebody who's got...
Good rate of force development, naturally, you're already going to know because you're going to be like, oh, I've got a pretty decent sprint. Cool. Great. Have you ever tried training before? Have you ever done a lot of sprinting before? If the answer is no, then, you know, you are really treading into new territory and you need a map. So you need to start trying things and seeing what you respond to. But again, you've got to make sure that you are giving yourself enough rest that...
that your sprint stays decent. So I think when it comes to kind of the balance, maybe we can take a step back here between these two questions. What's the balance point, do you think, Kyle, between that kind of I need to develop my sprint training versus I have to get aerobically better so I can actually make it to the end of the race with some gas in the tank training? Yeah, that's a good point. Yeah, I think obviously...
Getting to the end of the race is the first, like, you can have a 3,000-watt sprint for all it matters. If you only last 15 minutes into a 45-minute race, like, it doesn't matter, right? You just need to go back and you need to figure out what is the first hill that you need to get over, not the, like, 10th hill or whatever. So if it's, yeah, if it...
It's cool to have a big sprint and you think like oh crits are really sprinty but also plenty of people get by doing pretty well in crits not have it like so right probably famously Adam Meyerson like used to do pretty well and like a lot of like a lot of big crits right like and it's not like he was a 1900 watt sprinter ever like and do you think and so it's not like he was thinking like oh man I gotta go out and just do all these sprint workouts
I mean, I haven't seen this training. I don't know. Yeah. I mean, but, but like you don't, what I'm saying is you don't have to necessarily be just hammering sprint workouts over and over and over again to be a good crit racer to have success. Like, like it's not, it's not the, uh, you know, one solution to, to crits. Yeah, true. And I mean, there's also a lot of other stuff here that, you know, is kind of tangential to this and that's, that's more in like a normal coaching kind of thing where.
If I would sit down with this person and say, show me some GoPro footage. I want to see the lines you're taking. I want to see how closely you're hanging on to wheels. I want to see how much time you spend in the wind. And then we can really start to figure stuff out because otherwise, it's sort of like...
It's sort of like if you're playing a strategy game and you amass this giant army and you've worn off all your other attackers and suddenly you come out at the end and you dominate the last... It's like in Risk. It's like if you hoard everything onto one little island and then at the end you can manage to go out and clean up everybody who's been beating each other up. Okay, cool. That's great.
That's the equivalent of being a Cat 4 with a 400-watt FTP and a 1900-watt sprint. Right, right, right. And there's other stuff you can do in the meantime. The level of performance I've seen some people get, like clients and consultees and friends and all sorts of folks who, on paper, you would think, you're not going to top five this race. And then they're on the podium.
and you're like, man, that was some smart racing. And you go watch how they did it. And it's like, wow, they're never in the wind. I don't see them. I don't see them. I don't see them. And they pop up in the last two laps. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so that's, that's another component to all of this where, um, you know, I think a lot of folks could probably greatly improve what they're doing if, if they think about the whole thing holistically of.
you know of how hard these efforts are and trying to do as little as possible of them yeah and that's a different kind of work too right like this is like you know mental training like strategic things awareness all this stuff that is like probably less fun less like sexy to talk about than what intervals yeah what intervals is Matthew Vanderpool doing like it doesn't that's not gonna that's not the problem like
There are no miracle intervals that Matthew Vanderpoel is doing that you need to do. I mean, I've seen the intervals he's doing. There's no miracle intervals in there. It's just the miracle is that his grandfather's Raymond Polidor and that, you know, he's got the massive engine that he does. And actually, you know, what's funny is, God, have we talked about this in the podcast before? Vanderpoel and Van Aert, when they were coming up through cyclocross before they went where the money is in road,
you know, a lot of people were like, ah, they would never make it on the road. They don't have the aerobic fitness. They could just sprint really well. And it's like, I was like, uh, no, I don't know about that folks. I'm pretty sure they have some massive aerobic engines. And if they went out to the road, they would do really, really well. And, um, uh, do I need to point anybody to their results pages or ever? I mean, yeah, it's like,
Yeah, that's just a silly, you know, I think people think like, oh, cyclocross races are short, blah, blah, blah, whatever. But like, it's not like it's max back squats, right? Like, it's still an aerobic sport. Oh, God, no. Although you do remember that competition that Forstman did of like, how many squats can you do in what was it, like a minute or something?
Yeah, it was like body weight. You had to have like your body weight on the bar total. Yeah. And it was like how basically like doing that till failure or five minutes or whatever it was. Yeah. Yeah. He did pretty well. He didn't win though. Anyway, what were we talking about? Yeah. Crit racers. Crit racing. Yeah. Okay. Do we have any other thoughts on this before we kind of fold in the next?
because I think we kind of talked about rate of force development, peak power. And actually, you know what? Let's talk a little bit more about aerobic adaptation because that never goes out of style. And so I think part of also what's in this myth is that sprinters would adapt differently than non-sprinters, right?
Now we can start thinking about high-intensity interval training and the amount of evidence there is in the scientific literature for people to go out and do 30-second sprints with four-minute rests and that's going to bump up your VO2 max and this must be great for sprinters. It's like, okay, sure, maybe. But, you know, it's one of those things. Like, go out and do it and see what happens. Because I train plenty of sprinters where for the first, like, couple weeks when they're getting back to training, unless they go out and just...
literally do a couple sprints or go into the gym and do a couple hard squats. They don't feel like they've got their legs under them yet. When it comes to aerobic stimulus, the thing is the aerobic signals between non-sprinters and sprinters are the same.
You're not like a different species. And even if that, like, you know, even other mammals have the same. Yeah, no, literally. I mean, I think this is actually, you know, because this is only slightly related, but, you know, it's like Inigo San Milan's looking at cancer right now and he's like, oh my God, these cancers all make a bunch of lactate. And it's like...
Yeah, of course they make a bunch of lactate. There's no aerobic stimulus, and so there's hardly any mitochondria, and there's hardly any aerobic metabolism happening, so of course they have to rely on glycolysis. Of course there's nowhere for the lactate to go, so they have efflux. To me at least, it's pretty obvious from my understanding of metabolism. Can we stop glycolysis in cancer cells? I think that would kill them, so it's probably a good avenue to go down.
But I think that's the thing. It's like you need that stimulus. You need that aerobic stimulus somehow. And like endurance riding, whether you're a sprinter or not, it's really, really good. But the thing is that I see that's actually a big difference between sprinters and non-sprinters is that sprinters who have a really high aerobic load will typically lose some watts on their sprint. And the more and harder they train aerobically, the more that...
That happens. And then, you know, even if we add in sprint training, it doesn't quite happen because there's all that fatigue there. So that's really why I emphasize the recovery aspect of this whole thing, too. Yeah, that makes sense. And I think there's something to, like, you know, as you've said before, your fatigue security blanket, where you're like, oh, yeah, I'm doing all this, like, hard aerobic training. I'm going to be in really good shape. And, like, you are, to some extent, in really good shape. It's just that...
You may have like this layer of fatigue over top of it actually stopping you from showing that you're in really good shape. Yeah. Well, and that's one of the things about that is probably actually a tricky thing about really being a sprinter and going into road races is you've got to have just enough aerobic conditioning to make it to the end and smash that sprint. And if you're in the tour.
You know, God help you. That's a different problem. Yeah, that is a totally different problem, like energy management and all that kind of stuff. But, you know, then if you rest too much, you start to lose some of that form, even though you've got your sprint and you might not be able to get to the end of that race like you thought you wanted to. Well, you didn't want to, definitely. So I think that's kind of where the tricky balance part is. And that's why I think...
When it comes to actually being a sprinter, your experience and how you feel your legs best respond is way better than what anybody else thinks is good for you. Because if you've got empirical evidence that your legs are good after you do this, that, and the other thing, and you can win a race, don't let anybody tell you different, including me. I mean that. Yeah, yeah. But also keep in mind that, like you said before,
If you aren't getting the results that you want, it doesn't necessarily mean that you have to pile on more work. Yes. It may mean the opposite. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, especially if you're training real hard, you've been training hard for months or you train hard a lot for a couple of weeks. Yeah. Try adding more rest. Try doing less. Try sleeping more.
Try, I don't know, ketones. No, I'm just kidding. So, all right. So our next little bit to fold into this is that the myth of you don't need to train FTP if you're not a time trialist. And I know a lot of people who listen to this podcast are probably on board with just about all this stuff we're saying so far. But, you know, in case you're not, because I still do see this up on forums somewhat frequently.
so Kyle what's your thought on this do you need to train FTP for not a time trialist yes I mean not well first of all not all time trials happen at FTP plenty of them happen way over FTP like very far like for example even 20 minute time trials right the sheer nature yeah anyway so firstly that's weird because it kind of assumes that only
The time trials only happen at FTP, which they clearly don't. Especially in the UK, right? They have 10 mile, 5 mile, 20 mile, 30 mile. 100 mile? Yeah, 100 mile. Tons of different distances that are not FTP. And secondly, maybe they think if that means that you only have to train at exactly FTP...
then if you're not a time trialist that's weird but at least that leaves some room where it could mean that oh you can still do sweet spot or something like that but like the idea that you don't have to train your FTP at all if you're not a time trialist is very weird yeah I guess that maybe fits into this like some sort of like polarized philosophy where you're either doing long
Aerobic Base Rides or you're doing VO2 maxes or something. But there's still something to be said for doing, not just going straight from, you know, only a long aerobic base rides or VO2 max and actually sitting back and saying like, what do I need? What is my deficiency? Well, you know, I think this also kind of goes along with
One of my theses, one of my many theses, that there's no particular method of training that's going to best improve you aerobically and that you really need to do everything. Because I train a lot of people who had previously been doing just polarized or just very race-specific efforts or not doing a lot of volume or anything like that.
We tend to find quite a bit of fitness with them by just doing the rainbow of workouts, as it were. Maybe that's a terrible way to put it. I don't know. But I think... It's like the Skittles of workouts. Yeah. But it's sort of like also like how specific does your training need to be for your racing, right? Like if you're training intermittent sprints...
I mean, if you need to train intermittent sprints to get ready for your race, by all means, do it. Not everybody needs to, but this is part of the individualization of coaching. It's like, what do you feel works best for you? Like today, I had a call with one of my clients and I said, what is the, because this is our first year working together and first year going through cyclocross season together. And I said, what is the minimum number of races?
What cyclocross races you need to feel good in a cyclocross race? And the answer was, I don't know. I've never thought about that before. That's always an interesting answer, right? Whenever someone says, I don't know, I've never thought about that before. Really, to any question almost. Well, because usually the season is go to every race every weekend and train hard when you're not.
like, you know, the weeks of the races that you're not targeting and then rest before the races that you are targeting. I mean, that's that's a way to do it. Sure. And if you need to go to those races to gather points, then it's like, all right, well, now we've got a tough season ahead of us. But, you know, sometimes that's not what you need to do. And so you get a little bit more luxury of deciding to be really, really fresh and feel really strong for your races as opposed to just barely recovering from whatever you've been doing.
Yeah. So anyway, so that's kind of more on the, you know, crits racers focusing on anaerobic efforts type stuff. So when it comes to like FTP, you know, I think FTP for a lot of people is, I think also there's a reaction to it just socially. Like some people are like, oh my God.
Fucking FTP, will you shut up about FTP? And I completely understand that. I really do. I feel that way about some things, which we'll not name in this podcast, but every time I see it, I'm like, oh, God, this again. And so I really do sympathize and empathize because I think— Oh, what did I say? What? Yeah, I'm definitely inside my office. Yeah, okay, yeah.
When, you know, so when I think people think about, oh, FTP, who needs it? Because they're thinking, I don't ever race in a steady state effort, so I don't need to train it. I mean, I think, again, that's like, I think that's this sort of searching to have to find this like deeper wisdom there that
doesn't exist. You're looking for this really awesome nugget that you can pull out like that to justify doing or not doing something. And it would be great if that was a connection that you can make, but it kind of doesn't work, right? You do plenty of...
Would you only do race simulations then? You would never do long rides? You would never do 30-30s or whatever? You would only do race simulations? That seems weird. Maybe the least efficient way to get better at something. If you want to hit a baseball farther, would you go out every day and put a ball on a tee and swing away wildly?
I mean, oh, I don't know anything about baseball, but, uh, well, you know, here's the thing is like at the risk of, cause I don't, I, I, I don't want to be anything but diplomatic. Um, but you know, sometimes I see, uh, this kind of thing happening with other coaches, uh, who will write a plan. That's all race specific efforts, like a hundred percent, every single workout.
And then some recovery days and some, you know, two hours of endurance now and then and stuff like that. And it's like, that's a way to go. Yeah. And if it works for you, too, that's fine. But that kind of stuff may not be the best if you're actually trying to develop a rider long term. Right.
I think a long time ago we realized with the development of periodization and interval training generally that just say if you want to Roger Bannister trying to break four minutes in the mile didn't just go out and run a mile every day and try to go a little bit faster. There are a lot of examples you could draw like that where it's been known for a long time
and just going out and doing that thing over and over and over again is not like the most effective way. Yeah. Well, I haven't read it in a long time, but I think the Graham Obrey book actually talked about that being like the bulk of maybe it was the bulk of his training. I'm not entirely sure of like he would just go out and do an hour on his turbo. And then, you know, for the last like five or 10 minutes, he would raise the pace by like one or two kilometers an hour.
and then he would extend that earlier into the interval and then like that's how he would progress that. So, you know, it can work. But I think one of the things is that when I see this from other coaches is that I see selection bias because these coaches themselves are usually really fast and they're like, this is what I do. This is going to work. Or they have interesting coaching philosophies of, well,
This is the kind of race efforts you need to be ready for because this is the race you're going to have based on your level of fitness versus somebody else who's going to be at the front or chasing down breakaways or whatever. And so they would get different stuff that's race specific. And so while that is not necessarily wrong, the real question is what are you doing in the long term is what I always think about first. Like let's put the races of your season here in the context of what are we going to accomplish in the next two or three years.
Do we have a local elite who wants to be a pro conti in two or three years? Then that's a very different training philosophy and way of scheduling a year than we're going to have if somebody is like, no, I just kind of want to race and have fun and get some experience. These are two very, very different approaches to training. And so to me, it's more about what are we doing big picture?
That makes sense. Yeah, and I think that actually comes back to that point that you've made a lot, thinking about the long-term goal is not just short-term, I want to win a race, even though everyone wants to win a race. Who doesn't want to win? Yeah, or we've got to get you winning this race, and if you're going to get to the next level, and you definitely need that. And that's one of those things of finding the right balance, because especially with a lot of my development riders,
who do want to get to the next level, they want to go Pro Conti or they want to go World Tour, they definitely need results to start. Otherwise, they need to know somebody who can say, oh, I see you working for this team and not getting results, but you've got XYZ, so we're going to take you.
or something like that. I don't know exactly how all the politics of that kind of stuff works. I can only imagine it's either better or worse than I expect. So anyway, so where were we with all of this? That race-specific training is useful and is good. It's not like you should never do race-specific training. But if you think that, like, if you're justifying, you know, saying that
For example, you don't have to do FTP work if you're not a time trialist. Is that committing the error of like, well, if it's not race specific, I'm not going to do it. Yeah. And you know, actually, one of the things, despite the fact that I'm not the hugest fan of Aldo Sassi's strength endurance type intervals, I really do like his periodization philosophy that he used with, I think, Cadell Evans.
Where, you know, because if we take the very, very normal, you know, textbook, I'm trying to think of a person's name, not coming to me. It's on the tip of my brain, but it's not quite there yet. Maybe I'll blurt it out in a minute or two. But if we take the textbook version of periodization, it's, you know, general to specific, right? And we get more specific as we get closer to race day and we get less general.
right and so by the time you know if you're like a shot putter or a javelin thrower or something like that or a hundred meter dash runner like you're not going to be like you know doing leg presses like the day before you race hundred meter dash at the olympics um you might do that six months before but you're not going to do it the day before and so you've gotten more specific you've probably run a whole bunch of hundred meters in the meantime or 50s or whatever whatever they do i don't know how that kind of stuff works shot put throwers love watching shot put throwers um
And so they're not going to do heavy bench presses the day before a shot put, I would expect. And so when it comes to this long-term periodization, the thing I like about Aldo Sassi is that he actually saw opportunities to get in very general work.
in small blocks. Like he would take like a period of a month or two up to a smaller race and go general to specific, general to specific. And so you could do a couple smaller general to specific cycles. And especially for people who are pretty much right at their genetic limit, this does seem to be a very viable strategy to do it. And so you can actually get a lot more.
So instead of going like, oh, I'm only doing base rides and then I've got to go race like the Tour of Oman in like January, February or whatever, whenever it is on like, I've only been doing endurance rides. You can, you get some of that.
And you get that progression, that like stair step, kind of like go up and then a little down, then go up and a little down, then you go up a little more and you go a little down. And you can get that through the season. And I don't see that there's any wrong way to do it like that either. But the question is, is that right for what you're doing? Is it right for the long term stuff? Yeah, that makes sense. And I think obviously if you're doing such a long professional season where it starts.
where a lot of amateurs are still pretty deep into base training. They got to start racing, like actually racing. You have to take a much different approach than if, oh, I'm going to do crits June, July, and August, right? Like if that's all you're going to do, then you can take a much different approach. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, once you do get up to that level, because a lot of the pro racers I train will have this kind of dilemma.
is they are obligated to do their job. But if they want to get to the next level and we need to do a slightly different type of training, that's not going to let them do their job. It's like, well, you've got to do your job and we're going to fit a training that we can. But realistically, it's going to take longer than we might expect to get you to X, Y, and Z because you've also got to keep your contract and keep your income. Yeah, for sure.
All right, do we have any more thoughts? Because we could really, I hadn't thought about a title for this, but I think it might be like, you know, something about the myth would be like the best training is race specific or something like that. Can you think of anything else along that vein where, actually, do you want to talk about sprinting? This might be a good way to think about that. Okay, sure.
All right, so in track sprinting, because I get a lot of requests for us to do more track sprinting stuff. So here you go, people. Kyle, do you think that doing a whole bunch of sprints over the course of a year is like, let's just take this in a vacuum, just on the bike. All you're going to do is sprint all year.
If you do this for three or four years, how much do you think you could progress versus doing something a little more periodized? If you're brand new, I wasn't going to lead off with it depends, but if you are brand new, there's always those noob gains. So assuming you're not, you would probably see
Gains early on very quickly, especially if you've been riding a bike and say you've just been doing, I don't know, Gran Fondos and ultra endurance stuff and then you just started doing a bunch of sprints, like you would see likely a lot of progression early on very rapidly, but then you would plateau really quickly as you hit some limiter of your sprint performance, whether that would be like rate of force development, like max force, you know, anaerobic capacity, something you would hit a limit and you would stop.
progressing nearly as quickly because or, you know, it could be technique, it could be whatever. But, you know, I think that is why it's, you know, all these things are not nearly as simple as they appear on the outside. And so, yeah, you see these new gains or these these these beginner gains early on and then you would plateau and you'd probably get kind of frustrated if you literally just went out and did, you know.
10, 5 second max sprints every day for a year or something. It sounds harder than it actually will be for a real sprinter. In addition to being extremely boring. Yes, it would be very, very boring. Because I think, you know, because it's one of those funny things where like in sprinting, there's like
There's really not a lot to work on in terms of breadth of developmental stimuli. Sprinting is interesting because it's a little more biomechanically dependent than road cycling, which is very much like a fitness thing. In sprinting, standing start technique can matter a great deal if you're doing a kilo or a pursuit or something like that.
and if you're a pure sprinter the question is how do you get faster in the long run right like so if you do just a bunch of flying 200s let's say and just a bunch of like match sprint practice and stuff like that like you know I could because you're gonna get faster by
getting better technique and getting better skills in your mat sprints and all that kind of stuff. Reaction time or something. Yeah, reaction time and familiarity with banking and handling your bike on a track that's steep or not steep and how those two things can differ in strategy. Because I remember a couple of years ago at T-Town, was it Rachel, I think?
was way up in the banking and she was up against a Kiwi who was used to racing on 250s. And on a 250, when you come around turns one and two right at the start of a match sprint, it's usually real slow and it's too slow to like actually stay up on top of the banking. On a 333, that's like a 20, what is it, seven degrees banking? Yeah, 27, 28, something like that at T10. Yeah, you could like...
You can have lunch up at the top and not slide down. Yeah, yeah. You can literally track stand in the corner in like at the top of the track and the steepest part of the corner and you're fine. Yeah. And so this Kiwi was not looking behind her at all because she was expecting, oh, if she's going to go up and around me, I'm going to see it coming. And she's like up at the top of the track, like letting the distance go out.
and just like, just slams it and goes by at like, you know, plus like, I don't know, 15, 20 kilometers an hour and suddenly has like, I don't know, 15 bike lengths, 20. Yeah. And it was like, it was, it was over at that point. Like, and so, right. Yeah. Yeah. So that's one of those technique things that I think is really, really cool. That does matter a lot in sprinting, but at the same time,
Kyle, you've raced guys like Nicholas Paul, so how much can technique save you sometimes? It can't. It doesn't help make up a 10% difference in flying 200 time, I can tell you that from personal experience. I think you would notice that, even having done a bunch of these UCI races at T-Town, you will notice that the people
myself or other locals who are more used to racing on T-Town will ride sprints a little bit different than the UCI racers who are more used to racing on indoor wooden 250s. But I'm still not going to beat Sam Webster. It didn't matter how many bike lengths he gave me. It wasn't going to be close. And so it is interesting that it is
I think road cycling especially gets the reputation of just being like very work rate oriented like the higher your work rate like you're generally going to win more races and like if you just you know are really fit or you have a lot of times you train a lot you're going to win more races and you just pedal you know like as opposed to say like the you know hockey ice hockey where there's everyone knows there are a lot of skill components in ice hockey and you don't
People generally would probably say there are fewer skill components in road cycling than ice hockey. But yeah, on track sprinting, you definitely get more of these skill and strategy components just because you do weird things like crawl around at 10 kilometers an hour the first half lap or whatever. Yeah, and it can be so slow that an official actually walks with you around the first two turns to make sure you're keeping up at least that pace or they blow the whistle and make you do it again because you went way too slow.
One way too slow. Exactly. And like, um, and so I think with that, like there are those components. And so you can spend time working on those when you are, you know, and then, so that will take up some of your time as well. And in addition to, to maybe lifting weights or doing intervals. Um, but even with that, like those are all the other components that you'd be missing. If you just did, I'm going to go out and do sprint, sprint a lot on my bike.
Yeah And so long term like you think for sprinting track sprinting development like you see it you see it in a lot of these young up and coming like international sprinters like a lot of the really good countries are focusing really really strongly on like making them like absolutely as stupid strong in the weight room as possible at like early young ages like like a really stupid stupid values like
for max squats and leg press and things like that. And long term, that seems to have panned out pretty well for Australia and New Zealand and the Netherlands. Yeah, I remember Lynn Monroe in an interview once saying that you could fast track the physiological development. And if you have the gift to put on a lot of muscle mass and a lot of strength and maintain your rate of force development, yeah, you could definitely fast track that kind of stuff if you're 20.
and the genetic freak, which is awesome. But it's funny because the soft skills are a larger component, but they're not a big component. And so when it comes to should your training look more like you're racing, I would say for track sprinting, it should do that to the same degree as being a sprinter on the road.
You know, learning to negotiate a bunch sprint. Where do you have to be in this criterion? Like whose wheel do you need to be on? Should you go on the inside or the outside? Like, you know, should you get on that train or should you elbow your way into it? Like if it's leasing, you probably don't want to elbow your way into it. They're going to throw all those back, you know? And so there's those kind of skills that are just as important. But at the same time, it's like you've still got to get there. It's like it's kind of.
In sprinting on the track, I think actually it's kind of baked into the rules. Because if the person at the bottom of the bracket would beat the person at the top of the bracket more often, the person at the top of the bracket wouldn't get a bye for the first round or two. Right, right, right. And I think that's another thing too. Early on, especially in development, developing these skills are great, but there is...
and understandably so a strong focus on developing that flying 200 speed because you don't get to use any of those skills if you don't make the bracket. It's just like it's the exact same as if you're not making it to the end of the crit, it doesn't matter how big your sprint is. You can be the craftiest, best bike handler in the world and if you're going 17 seconds in the flying 200, it doesn't matter. Yes, I would agree with that.
I think some people I've seen on forums people be a little crotchety about that. Why aren't people focusing on all these other parts of track sprinting? Why are they so focused on making my flying 200 times faster? Well, that's the ticket to the dance, right? If you don't have a ticket, you can't get in. It is good to bring up those skills along the way, but
Unless you're just doing round robin sprints for fun, you don't get to use those skills necessarily or even apply them if you're not making the bracket. It's funny because I think all of this stuff, neither of them are mutually exclusive. You can still develop your absolute level of strength in track sprinting. It doesn't mean that you spend every day in the gym and you never go to the track to work on...
on practicing match sprints with your buddy or practicing your 200 line or anything like that. Right, totally. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, it's not like they're, they're not mutually exclusive. It's just, I think people always ask, you know, like forums, new people, things like that. Like, oh, how do I get my, my flying 200 time faster? Like, oh, how do I, you know, get higher peak power, you know, better 10 second, 20 second power, all these things. And like, yeah, because that's like, those are the, those are like the minimums, you know, like every, every international level, like male.
Track Sprinter in the world can do 25 watts per kilogram, no problem. So if that's not you, you can't get there. So of course people are going to be like, how do I get there? Don't not be fast.
That's how you do it. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Like, oh, you can't do 2,400 watts? Sorry. That's like, it's not my problem. Although I do love the, I can't, I do love some of those kilo guys like Thomas Baubach and Eilers who, you know, whose peak power is like 2,100, 200 watts. It's like, when I'm in shape, like, man, come on, I could do that. But like, am I that fast? No. Yeah, but then they can do 1,100 for a minute. Yes, I also cannot do that.
God, what's my best, like 900? Oh, man. Yeah, it's a long way to go. Like, all these guys at US TrackNats, you know, just this week who did a kilo, like, a bunch of these guys going 105, you know, 106 mid to 105, 104 in the kilo are doing 800 plus watts for a minute. So if you can't do that, like, you're not going to go 105 outdoors in the kilo. Like, there's just no, like, you know, like...
unless unless you weigh nothing and have like a 400 watt FTP and just like FTP your way there. But even then, like the start. Yeah, you kind of watch your splits and you can kind of make it up in the back half if you don't accelerate that fast. But like, you know, that's one of those cool things about checking out those charts of like the speeds and the splits of the kilo from Worlds, you know, looking at who started too hot and faded or who kind of paced it a little more evenly as if there's really pacing in the kilo. Come on, who are we kidding? Right.
For the Enduros, there are the Enduros who do it. That's true, they do. And then they can walk afterwards unlike the rest of us. It's a big difference. Shout out to Jamie Alvord for a 104.8 or whatever he went yesterday in the Kilo Outdoors. I didn't watch it because I was just watching the electronic timing, but yeah, he must have rode a huge gear because he had like not the fastest
First lap, but the fastest second and third lap. Nice. He was rolling. Yeah. Well, I think to parallel that with aerobic stuff, it's sort of like when people harp on others on forums about the soft skills, about hiding in the wind and cornering and saving energy.
reading the race and things like that. Like those are very, very, very real things. And most people are asking about physiology and it's, I think it's sort of like, it looks like these kinds of things are butting heads a little too much. And it's like, you're both right. You do need to train your FTP and you do need to train your sprints, but you also need to get better at cornering. And you also need to like, I don't know, let 20 PSI out of your tires probably.
Or actually practice in aero bars before you use your time trial bike or whatever. Yes. Yeah. If it's kind of a windy day and you've never – you're thinking about putting your 808 on the front in a windy TT, like maybe go out and try it first. See if you can handle it. Maybe you're going to want to put on your 303 instead or maybe even like an aluminum shallow rim. Oh, no. But yeah, so I think there's definitely room for –
a lot of this kind of stuff. And that nobody's necessarily right and nobody's necessarily wrong. And I'm not even saying everybody's right, so therefore I'm the most right. That's also not true. Wait, does that make me the most right? I don't know. Probably not. But yeah, I think when it comes to how specific do you need to be with training, the real answer to this is how specific do you need to be?
I'm going to throw it right back to you. Like, what do you, what makes you race best? And if, you know, if you're one of the local people who are just trying to improve their, you know, just trying to get to the end of a, you know, like a four or five race or three, four race or whatever it is, um, working on all of it really is a good idea. But, you know, the question is like, how far are you going to go and how far can you go? And you never know until you actually try to get there.
And if somebody's like, you know what, the skills are going to take you a long way, then worry about the physiology. I would say you definitely, it's another one of those things where you need both, right? Because people who are so fast early on, they get to a high level and they don't know how to negotiate a bun sprint or like to send in a pack or anything like that because they're used to being alone off the front. This is also another problem. And man, the number of my friends who have like made it to the UCI level in the US.
just based on Watts alone. Well, the number is more than one. Let's just say that. And they're like, man, if I hadn't been as fast through the lower categories, I would have better soft skills now. And I would probably be getting better results. And the answer is, yeah, if you could hide in the wheels in the pack for, you know.
until the last, until you get to like Mount Gaylor at Joe Martin, like, yeah, okay, yeah, you probably have better results than if you pulled for the whole race until you got there, et cetera, et cetera. So, yeah, do we have any closing thoughts for this? No, I mean, I think, I think, yeah, I think.
It's kind of a cop-out, I think, to say how specific. Well, you have to be exactly as specific as you need to be and no more. But it's understandable in the sense that there's no universal answer to that, but also that specificity is good, but it's not the end-all be-all of training philosophy. Yeah, definitely not. And here's another thought also for people out there.
Which do you err more on? You know, it's like, should I go to a couple extra races or should I do a couple extra long rides? And the question is like, what do you want to do with yourself in the long run? Like if you have the ambition of going pro, which is your bigger weakness? Like if you're really good at negotiating a bun sprint, you probably don't need to go to so many races.
Probably need to get better aerobically. If you're great aerobically and you're like, man, how come I just am coming in 10th all the time? Maybe you should go to more races. And of course, if you don't ever want to go pro or whatever, if you just want to go race and enjoy yourself, then it doesn't matter. The number one thing is just enjoy yourself. You don't feel like going to a race? Go on a long ride and get some ice cream. Go to the farthest.
The furthest good bakery that you can find. Go ride there and get some donuts and then ride home. That sounds lovely. I hope so. Before we wrap it up, because I just attempted to wrap it up and I forgot to answer Instagram questions. At Empirical Cycling on Instagram, obviously. So, oh, here's the first one. This is really good. Sprinters don't really need to train differently, just have different recovery needs. Question?
We kind of touched on this and whoever asked this, that is really excellent thinking. That is an excellent question. An astute listener. What is base training for sprinting? Kyle? Max back squats now, huh? Yeah, leg strength. General leg strength. Yeah.
Yeah, both bilateral and unilateral. I don't really—I kind of think of them as going up and down together, but we kind of talked about bilateral deficit once in the podcast, but, you know, that's something else to look at, too. That would be interesting if they somehow didn't follow each other at all. I know, right? I mean, that's kind of one of those things why I said that, you know—
The biomechanics and even the motor learning aspect of sprinting is there is like much more important than in typical road cycling. Let's see. Would sprinters benefit from a more polarized approach coming into target races? Maybe.
Not universally No, not universally You know, one of the things that I find with bringing sprinters into target races is they usually need a little bit less FTP type, like sweet spot type work than I would usually give somebody else but mostly that's out of trying to control fatigue
and if I do give that kind of thing to a sprinter then it's usually because I find or I think for some reason or other that it's going to help them on race day because they need a little bit of that aerobic stimulus they need to like tread that pathway just a little bit before they get to race day to like because otherwise I'm one of these people where if I was doing road racing or crits and I wanted to you know
I was a sprinter. I was all in for those last two laps and preams along the way sometimes if they had good muffins. I would need to do some of that training heading into the race. I would need to do a 2x20 sweet spot or something like that. Otherwise, I would get to the race and just feel like I didn't quite have the aerobic strength that I needed to recover from the hard efforts. It depends, as always. Sorry about that.
Let's see. How do I make more watts? Try pedaling harder. Types of training for sprinters to improve FTP. The same training everybody else does. You need a lot of endurance. You need some VO2 max work and you need some threshold work and good genetics.
Actually, here's a good question. Do sprinters need to ride slower on endurance rides? Maybe? Slower? I mean, like, generally, hopefully you're not doing, you know, the one watt below zone three bullshit. Oh, it's an endurance ride now. Technically, it's like one watt below zone two. This is technically a recovery ride.
You're right, yeah If you do find that you are someone who does, yeah, is more fatigued than maybe, but there may be something to be said for everyone doing a little bit easier on all of those Well, my athletes who ride very large volumes
will actually usually pace those rides a little bit differently depending on the length. If somebody's got eight hours to ride, they'll usually go easier than if they have a three-hour endurance ride. That's just down to the pacing and the fact that if you really rode right up at LT1 for eight hours, it would be pretty fatiguing. You've got a lot more rides to do that week, and you've probably got intervals and races and stuff like that.
Yeah, usually riding easier than you expect for endurance is better. And I'm going to advocate the talk test again and having a really good ride buddy or several who like to be conversational. And you've got to hold it at the pace of the person with the lowest conversational pace. And I promise you those extra 20, 30 watts is not going to make a huge difference at the end of the ride. So slow down.
It's cool. We'll talk about riding with faster people, another one. That's another myth that we got that I think is great. And so if you want to submit some myths, by the way, just DM me on Instagram because sometimes I'll put up the question box in the stories, but other times I won't. So if you have a thought, just shoot me a DM. Oh, here's an interesting one. Not a sprinter, but punchy rider. Should I work on my strengths of two to six minute power or weaknesses 20 plus minute efforts?
Both? Yeah, it's like, what's your race? Is that too much to ask for? Yeah. If you're doing a road race with a lot of punchy efforts, definitely do both. But on the way, if you need that kind of training of like, I need to do some punchy hills. Like I remember before I rode Battenkill, I found that the Tuesday before the race, which I...
I think it was on Saturday. It might've been on Sunday. Um, I would always go to Summit Ave in Boston and smash it like four or five times. Um, which is for me at the time was like a two minute hill, but in Batonkill was all like two, one to two, three minute hills. And I always had a good race like that.
But that also meant that I had to do all the aerobic trainings to get me there. So you've got to put the polish on top of – you've got to build the nice thing to polish first, and then you polish it, and then everything's all set. It's like you can't – actually, no. The Mythbusters did prove that you can polish shit. Yeah, you can polish a turn. Yes, you can. Okay.
Oh, here's a good one. We kind of talked about this too, actually. So can a sprinter be good at time trials, Kyle? I would say that big yes. Marcel Kittel famously was like a very good U23 time trialist before he was like, I like the sprinting thing too. Obviously.
who you could say is a sprinter, has won a few time trials, I believe, in his day. Maybe possibly a couple. Four days ago, five days ago, whatever. And so, yes, I think you find this true with crit riders, too. There are a lot of good crit racers, quote-unquote sprinters, who are also good time trialists. Yeah, definitely.
And if I'm not mistaken, I believe even Cav has had a couple good prologues in his day, like in the top 10 or something like that for the really short ones. I could be mistaken, but if memory serves, and it may not, I don't have COVID brain like Kyle does, but... Sorry, Kyle. No, it's fine. Everyone's favorite sprinter freak, Ed Clancy.
is a road sprinter and has done very well in short prologue time trials. Also, the individual pursuit is a time trial. And Filippo Ghana has a giant max power and he can also pursuit pretty well, I'd say. He was the world record holder until Lambie went to altitude and took it down. But yeah, definitely. And especially for the short stuff, but the long stuff too,
You can definitely have a sprinter who has a really good time trial, even for like 40k. They're really not mutually exclusive. Yeah, and if you think about it, a lot of times, especially for flatter time trials, what are the riders that do better? Like the riders that tend to have a little bit more muscle mass, you think of being like time trial riders, right? Like being your slightly bigger riders, which are often also your more sprinter-y, classics-y riders, right? Like these things aren't...
Mutually exclusive. And obviously, all these road sprinters also have a very good FTP if they are making it to the end. Not that all time trials have to happen at FTP, but they're not like aerobic delinquents. Aerobic delinquents like me. Yeah, sure. Should road sprinters train in the gym differently than the average road racer?
Did I say that right? Did road sprinters train in the gym differently than the average road racer? It really depends on what you want to work on. Because I think most athletes should get into the gym for a little bit for bone density. A lot of broken bones when you hit the deck if you've got little bird bones. GC rider bird bones. Huh? Yeah, like GC rider bird bones where you're worried that Chris Froome is going to just fall and break a hip.
Ouch. Too soon. Yeah. Although he has made an awesome comeback and from that level of injury, I mean, he has done an awesome job to get where he's at. Sure, yeah, yeah, yeah. It's just, that's what I think about when I think of like people with like low money, like, ooh, he like had, you know, like one bad crash and it just like completely changed the course of his career. Yeah, for sure. But, you know, I can't fault him for the shit that he's gotten for the comeback because
You know, he set an ambitious goal for himself and everybody was holding him to that goal. Yeah. So, you know, if he had said, I'm just trying to come back. I just want to help my team and pass some knowledge on to the next generation. Everybody would have been like, you know, I think we all would have applauded him a lot sooner. But yeah, he's doing great. Sprint training on the bike with fresh legs or with fatigue?
Definitely want to go with fresh legs there. If you think about sprint training, similarly to aerobic training, if you are so tired that you can't get, let's say, close to 90% of your best sprint power at that sprinty interval that you're doing, 5, 10, 20 seconds, whatever it is, it's not actually doing a lot to help get you...
I mean, except in the maybe if you're doing like only anaerobic capacity work, right? Like if you, it's like if you only did sets of five squats, but it was with 50% of your max, like you would very, very, very slowly maybe get better or possibly not get better at all.
And so if you're especially for sprint workout, like you may think like, oh, if I'm tired, I'm doing something where I'm teaching my muscles to make more force when I'm tired. Like, well, no, like if your goal is to produce more power, more total power, more total force or more force for longer than you want to do that when you can get your body really close to producing already the best you can and then going more over or doing it more.
Yeah, I think you had said something like 90%. I would say even higher, like 97 to 98% of your best is where you want to be close to. Like if I go out for sprints and lately my max is like 1950. And so if I'm not hitting like, if my goal is to make peak power, if I'm not hitting like 1850, I'm like, I'm exhausted. I'm going home to eat something. And I just pull the plug on the workout right there. I guess it's a good point. Like usually in warmup, like.
I can I can usually hit like probably 95 within 95 percent of my 93 95 percent of my best like peak power like pretty much whenever as long as I mean that's also why you're warming up too like you're not quite right yeah there yet oh yeah for sure this is like yeah like after easy ride you know easy noodle around warm-up and then you do a couple like you know warm-up sprints and yeah if those aren't within 93 95 percent of your max you're like I'm tired
Yeah. Well, I mean, I've also seen this going around too, where I think, you know, people are afraid to do hard efforts earlier in a ride, because hard efforts typically produce lactate, and they don't want to burn lactate, they want to be burning fat. And I know some people feel like my tone is always a little, sometimes can be a little...
talking down, I think. But I think that is stupid. Sorry. I'm really sorry. Ripping the bandaid off there. It's fine. It's fine to do that. The real goal is performance, then especially with sprints when you need to make more power, only sprint when you make a ton of power. If you shift your sprints to earlier in the ride,
you're going to make more power and I bet you are going to see your power go up if that kind of training is going to produce a good stimulus for you. So that's it. Let's see. Here's an interesting one. So higher FTP may not give you more matches. Does this mean fewer grabs into the match box? And I think this is actually a really interesting thing to think about, Kyle, because
A lot of people throw on the terms burning a match. And I remember way back in the day when my friend was trying to help me climb better, he goes, if you need to, just burn a sprint. I'm like, how many do you think I have anyway? And how long do you think it takes to recover? Because here's like a breakaway guy who can peak at like, you know, maybe 1100 watts when he's super fresh. And I'm doing like, you know, 1400, 1500 watts. And I'm like, man, do you understand the difference?
like 100 watts of FTP makes between you and me and recovering from an effort like that. I could burn a sprint to get up that hill, but like I'm not making it to the finish line. Yeah, I'm going to stop at the top. So the question is, how do we define a match? Ooh, how do you define a match? Yeah, I guess it's like that, like when you have to like...
subconsciously dig, I guess. You know, that's what I think of like when you have to like, you know. Well, here's, I think here's the, I've never really thought about this deeply before. So you can hear, that's why you can hear that the hamster on the wheel in my head wheezing and coughing right now. But I think it's that my problem with this analogy is that a match is discreet. Like this is, it's not like,
It's not like in quantum physics where you get down to a small enough unit and you find a quanta and this is the smallest packet of energy that we've got and we can just measure things based on this discrete unit. Did I get that kind of right? Yeah. And so I think the problem with this analogy is that like...
You're not really reaching for a match so much as you're reaching into a barrel of gunpowder. That makes sense, yeah. It's like a battery. You have some total amount that you can use, and you can dole that out in certain smaller doses. That's fine. Or you can just light it off. Boom.
Yeah, that's me quote unquote burning a sprint to get up a hill. Yeah, so I think here's the thing is like if your FTP is higher, I think actually not reaching into the matchbox is probably a good way to think about it because if you are in a race and your surges are 350 watts and your FTP is 300 watts, if your FTP were 350 watts like...
That would be much less taxing because now you can match that surge more or less aerobically, right? And now once you start going over that, now you've got some aerobic capacity a little bit left over, right? Because we've got some VO2 max, but you're also really reaching into that anaerobic capacity reserves. You're starting to burn glycogen because now you have to meet the energy demand with extra glucose from glycolysis.
Yeah, so I think in that way, having a higher FTP, that's another way to say it. It's like you may not have to reach down to the battery that much. And so if you step up to the line, you've got a 450-watt FTP, and you're racing a bunch of Cat 3s with a 300-watt FTP, sitting in the race for you, you're going to be nose-breathing, and you're going to get out of your phone and play some solitaire. It's not going to be hard. Telling jokes, you're going to be, yeah. Yeah.
All right. We've only got a couple left. Lots of amateur track sprinters train like pros, but don't get faster. Is general fitness lacking? So actually, this is a really interesting one because in the track sprinting world, there's kind of two schools of thought on what makes somebody fast. And there's been an age-old debate on whether you need aerobic fitness.
The start of your warm-up to your last match sprint in a day, if that's eight hours, do you need to be able to ride for eight hours? Question? Yeah, I generally trend towards no. There's nothing wrong with the occasional endurance ride, especially if you enjoy that.
Especially if you, say, are trying to lose weight or something like that But to say that, like, you need to also be focusing on FTP while you're doing gym and track sessions and all this stuff is, I think, a kind of bad use of your time
Yeah. Well, I mean, Kyle, like you've done like you did like three aerobic workouts because you signed up for a crit. You're like, I did a stupid thing. I'm racing a crit. I was like, oh, OK, cool. That was like the extent of your aerobic work for the year, more or less, the occasional road ride. So like and you took off like how many tents from your 200 doing like this past year? Yeah.
uh well so yeah I shaved well this I'm not at Nats now because of COVID but I pre pre Nats I shaved another 50 hundredths like so half a tenth off my flying 200 from last year at Nats um just like a one of the UCI weekends at T-Town so you know that's okay from one year to the next that it's not the most rapid progression you could imagine but I'm not too upset about it yeah it's still like and and the year prior I had shaved like
more than a tenth off, I think, at least for my outdoor, I shaved T-Town time, but that was with COVID and all this stuff, so I hadn't raced for a while and got a bunch of training in, but also then didn't get a bunch of training in because obviously COVID, a lot of times there was no gym access and stuff like that. Yeah, it's really been screwing with the taper for this year, but yeah, a lot of it's just like, because it's funny, it's like, what did you say a couple weeks ago? You were like, I don't know what we've been doing, but
What was like 115 gear inches doesn't feel that big anymore? Yeah, yeah, yeah. I did a 500. I did a T-Town time trial weekend. I did a 500 on 115. And I like, you know, it was like rolling around in the infield on 115. I was like, oh, this doesn't, this actually doesn't feel that big. That's weird. That's kind of disturbing, actually. And then like coming out of the start.
like obviously the first like two pedal strokes like this is a huge gear but I was actually like oh I actually got up to speed like not in a completely glacial amount of time and actually had I been at T-Town at Nats that's probably what I would have run for the Kilo and for people playing along at home that's why that's I believe that's yeah like 64.15 so yeah which is let's see 64.15 is like yeah it's like
That's bigger than 5313. That's like 5012 or something. It's bigger than 5012. So yeah, so if you've got a compact, if you've ever tried to put your bike in like 50, anyway. Yeah, from a dead stop. So anyway, so to answer the question, which we are excellent at dodging, I think, but this is typical of our regular off-air conversations.
So to answer the question, why do a lot of amateur sprinters train like pros but don't get faster? The answer is they're not usually working on what's going to make them faster. So there's really three components of sprinting. The first is how fast can you pedal? So what's your rate of force development? How hard can you pedal? So what's your max force?
and also what's your anaerobic capacity. So between those three things, we really have a triangle of speed and there's also soft skills along with that kind of stuff too. But, um, you know, if you're not pretty much, if you're not getting stronger and you've maxed out your anaerobic capacity and your soft skills, um, you're going to find a couple of thousands maybe, uh, from arrow and from technique. And that's about it. Okay. Maybe, maybe a couple of tenths if your arrow is really bad.
But yeah, like the long-term stuff doesn't, you know, it's like we were talking about the Aussie sprinters, like they get so stupidly strong, and then they're really fast, and that's the way to do it if you want to get that fast. Yeah, what was that video that Harry Lavracin just posted? He was back squatting 215 kilograms for five, I think?
yeah like oh god yeah oh and don't forget um what is that in freedom units that's like two that's four it's like 475 475 for five yeah so he's like well you can squat well over 500 pounds max like well over 500 pounds yeah no big deal yeah um uh let's see so
Not a sprinter, but do I have to train differently when I have more fast twitch fibers than are good for me? No, you do not. The aerobic stimulus is going to be the same regardless, so just go train. Don't even think about it. Go ride your bike, yeah. Go ride your bike. Training for... Okay, nope. I did not listen to that podcast episode, so I do not know what black box anybody's talking about.
Oh, how do you race an ITT with anaerobic capacity? Can you ride spikier versus smooth FTP levels? Well, I mean, that's one of the things about time trials is that the right split for folks, especially if there's elevation gain, is very different for everybody. So if you want to really maximize the anaerobic capacity you have, you've got to figure out where to use that, but also where can you recover from it?
And that makes it very, very difficult. So I just recommend Best Bike Split. Yeah, I would also say that, like, keep in mind that no one cares if you put out, like, a great average power on a time trial if you went 30 seconds slower than the winner, right? Like, the goal is to put out the average highest speed that you can. Like, power is secondary to, like, what strategy is going to make the most speed all the time? Yeah.
Yeah, for sure. I mean, and that's one of the reasons that, you know, Dan Bingham has been so good for the sport, is he's like, you know, forget what you think should happen. Like, we really just want to go the fastest. How do we do that? And so, yeah, that's a good way to think about it. Also, I think actually, this kind of gets to, this is something that's come up a couple times recently, which is actually VO2 max interval pacing.
And one of the things that I've noticed a while ago, I don't think it made it to our VO2Max podcast, but if you're a really, really good sprinter, you need to actually not go too hard out of the gates for your VO2Max stuff. Because that makes for one really excellent interval that makes you really excellently tired.
Yeah, like, so when you have big aeronorbic capacity, and here's one of the things, if you do have some, like, giant fast-twitch muscle fibers, like I do, for instance, your V2 max relative to your FTP relative to your V2 max, sorry, is going to be a little bit lower. And so when you do V2 max intervals, you're going to be, like, way a little higher up from your threshold than you might expect you would be, or you can be.
So you're already so high over what you can sustain aerobically in terms of your FTP that a lot of the time just that kind of elevation difference means you don't have to start that hard. And so I would usually recommend a slight positive split to even an even split. And typically as people, if they're doing a dedicated view to max block, as they go to the end, especially people with higher anaerobic capacities will not start quite so hard as they get further.
towards the end of the block, especially later in those interval sessions. That last effort is usually just flat as a board in terms of pacing, and that's fine. Interesting. All right, so this is the last one. This is tangentially related. But can surging during long races or very long rides
to produce more lactate help with fuel availability. That seems like an inefficient way to use more fuel. If you can just burn some fat aerobically, why wouldn't you just do that? Or burn some carbs aerobically. Yeah, carbs aerobically. Yeah, why wouldn't you just do that? Well, yeah, because here's the thing.
When you surge, the rate of ATP demand goes much higher than you can aerobically sustain. And so you obligately go through more glycolysis than you otherwise would. So I think what's missing here in this person's understanding with this question, which I think is actually a good question to ask, is that if you do this,
The muscle cell's lactate concentration goes up, obviously, but the rate of utilization is not as high as what you've produced. And therefore, the lactate can diffuse out of the cell into the bloodstream, and sometimes it'll go back into the same muscle, and sometimes it won't. It'll go to the liver, it'll go to the heart, it'll go to the brain, it'll go to wherever. And so the biggest detriment, though, to doing something like this
would be that when you surge and you churn through that glycogen, you don't get it back. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's a good thought. It definitely is. But when you aerobically oxidize glucose, you are producing lactate already. But you are doing it at a rate that you can already oxidize.
And that's it. You don't need to create extra because the lactate is actually locked up in your glucose and glycogen molecules. And so they will be made and quickly oxidized when they are needed. They just don't happen to show up in the bloodstream. And so one of the other questions is, if you do over-unders and stuff like that, is this going to help you with being able to oxidize lactate?
Potentially, I could see it creating more transporters. Again, I haven't looked into this kind of stuff yet, but I could easily see that being a thing. So there might be something to training in such a way, but I wouldn't want to do this on a long ride where fuel stores and nutrition are usually the main limiter of this kind of stuff rather than like, is there enough lactate? Can we make some lactate to store for later?
Yeah, like your stored glycogen is stored lactate. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's a good point. All right. Do we have any final thoughts here? Those were all questions up on the Instagram, by the way. So now that we are done recording, that story shall get deleted because... I think it was a good... Those are some good questions. I like those. Yeah, me too. Thank you, everybody, for the questions a lot. We really do appreciate those. And I appreciate getting so many.
in the course of the, what, hour that it was up before we recorded. So that's very nice of everybody. So thanks for that. At Empirical Cycling on Instagram, if you want to watch for that kind of stuff. Of course, we've also got weekend AMAs up in the stories. Those actually stick around. I don't delete those after we're done recording because we're not recording. It is for everybody else's edification or entertainment, I suppose, depending on if Kyle submits any questions that are somewhat tongue-in-cheek.
Why haven't you asked those in a while, Kyle? I missed those. Yeah, so I haven't thought any good, like, you know, I don't want to recycle anything. I got to come up with some new material. Oh, you can make me come up with new answers that way, I think. Yeah, anyway, so we don't have any show notes up for this episode, but we do have donations. You can look at empiricalcycling.com slash donate because we are ad free.
And of course, if you want to reach out for coaching inquiries or consultation inquiries, that is mainly what we do at Empirical Cycling, which is we coach people. And of course, we are available for consultations. Our time is your time. We'll talk about whatever you want. So empiricalcycling at gmail.com to reach out for that. Or you can slide into my Instagram DMs. If you have any training myths that you want us to tackle, submit those. Just DM me on Instagram if I don't put up a story. So that would be cool.
what else is there anything else that we usually plug um water bottle collab oh yeah water bottle collab hashtag it depends well maybe there's not a hashtag just it depends discount code 10% on your whole order um so yeah and um also I have a t-shirt so watch the Instagram um
There is a t-shirt. You can probably guess what it's going to be, so I'll probably put that up on Monday or something like that. Unless I get Lorena Vivas' training files, in which case I will post about her instead. That's going to be awesome. So thank you everybody for listening, and we'll see you next time. Thanks everyone.